Submissions on the Parliament Bill.
First up, we have Francis
from the Manuel Po Family Fund.
Oh oh
10 Aqua Francis.
Can you hear me?
Yes. 10 Aqua. 10 Aqua.
Uh, welcome to Parliament Bill Select Committee.
Um, the committee members have read your submission
and you have five minutes to speak to your submission.
Uh, I'm the chairman of the Manual Pay Family Whanau Trust
and, uh, the trust demand on request
for this official notice on a cease
and deist notification to be given
to the Governor General Dame Cindy Kiro,
to hold the government to a, an investigation
and failing to comply with the rules
and regulations, legislation sections of these amendments.
The Manual poe Family Whanau Trust opposes the Repressive
Amendment, bill, parliament bill, changing legislation
through Amendment bills, the Public Works Act 1981,
section 54 55, 56, 60 67
Trespass Act 1980, section 57 58 59
Constitution Act 1986,
section 50 51, 52 53 Public Service
Act 2020, section 47 48 49,
public Finance Act, 1989,
section 42, 43, 44, 45, 46,
and any other legislations
through these illegal amendment bills.
The Manu Poe Family Whanau Trust has no confidence in the
government coalition government.
Therefore, the Manu Poe family Whanau Trust
is given official notice.
This is a demand on request given notice of a cease
and desist on all illegal activities and,
and financial gain benefiting ministers of Parliament
and their families bringing financial implication,
eco economic hardship and harm to the New Zealand citizens
and the indigenous Native Maori.
Therefore, the the aforementioned conduct is actionable
under the breaches of the international Constitutional
Indigenous Monarchy Binding founding consented to Law
of Declaration of Independence,
18 35, 18 40
Maori Affairs Act 1953 UA Act 1993,
Maori Development Act
1963, the Manuel Po.
Family Whanau Trust demand on request
for an international independent internal external
investigation into the Repressive Amendment,
bills deliberately financially gain gaining
by public taxpayers money.
Furthermore, any more illegal activities if discovered under
these amendment bills to benefit ministers
and their families, such will be reported
to the appropriate authorities, UA
Members. Are there
any questions?
Uh, Francis, there doesn't seem to be any, um, questions.
Thank you for your submission.
Uh, the committee has noted your comments.
Uh, we now have Ezra Shaw,
Kira Ezra, welcome, um,
to the Parliament Bill Select Committee.
It's great to see, um,
hear a young person's voice on this matter.
Um, you've got five minutes,
and if you leave some time at the end,
we might have some questions for you.
Sure. Thank you. Um, so I am haw, uh, I like, um,
I assume everyone's gonna be my submission
and, um, I have some brief comments about my kind
of first two points, and then I'll, I'll try
and talk a bit about the contempt powers.
Um, but before that, I would like
to just say one thing about,
I think other submitters have made the point about the
application of the Official Information Act
to the parliamentary agencies.
Um, so both the parliamentary service
and the Office of the Clerk, um, I, I support that.
Um, I know there's been recent stuff about members expenses,
but even just generally, um,
the parliamentary agencies have a lot of information that,
um, is quite relevant.
Like, you know, like buying stationary
and stuff that people are interested in.
Um, and,
and there's no reason
that OIA shouldn't be applied to them, so I'd support that.
Um, so, so my first, um, two things that I like
to talk about are the, um, um, clause 30,
which is about members of Parliament seek becoming vacant.
Um, as I said in my written submission, it's kind of a bit,
the new wording is a bit kind of unclear with respect
to kind of, um, the wacker jumping legislation.
Um, and I think it should just be clarified that, um,
on only the ellips lacked, um, uh, sorry, the only,
the elector flat, um, only under the electorate cane,
um, seat to come back in.
Um, and the other clause is, um, clause 56, which relates
to the speaker's powers under the Trespass Act.
Um, it, the, the house,
and I'll obviously come to this later,
but the house, um, by resolution
can exclude people from the parliamentary precincts, um,
kind of like trespassing people for, for contempt.
Um, and I don't think the powers exercise
very often if, if at all.
But the wording of Clause 56 does kind of give the,
the impression that that power is gone,
which obviously I don't think was the intent.
I think it should be clarified.
Um, so, so the main thing I wanted
to talk about was the, the power.
So if, if a person does something which, um,
impedes the house or its offices in, in their duty, then
that is, that's a contempt.
Um, and, and the house can punish.
Um, and, and there are a number
of powers the house can use to do that.
Um, the, the most serious one is imprisonment,
but also power to find, to make,
to order an apology and, and so forth.
Um, currently those powers are not in legislation.
They were, um, by legislation,
they were inherited from the House of Commons.
And that's traces back for New Zealand's history.
But they were never, they've never been written down.
Um, and, and that's what I think things should happen.
They should, um, be given.
So, you know, there should be a second that says the power,
how the house from prison, um,
the already is one fines, but, and so forth.
And, and the reason is, the reason for that is to kind of,
to make the, the purpose of the bill is
to make the Constitution of New Zealand, um, more kind
of accessible and clear,
and that that change would,
would further the purpose of the bill.
Um, and, and since the passing of acts like the Bill
of Rights Act and so forth, um, more
and more weight has been given to making sure
that governmental power is kind of constrained, um,
by our human rights law.
And moving, putting the contempt powers into, into law kind
of brings it into that framework of,
um, our human rights law.
'cause obviously the kind of arbitrary power
to imprison people, which obviously hasn't been used, is a,
is a very serious matter.
Um, and, and there are kind of, I suppose, human rights kind
of implications that kind
and with the bill of Right, that come out of that.
Um, so, so moving it into codifying the powers brings it not
all the way, but it kind of a first step towards, um, making
it more kind of Bill of Rights compliant.
Um, and other submitters, um, have raised the possibility
of removing the imprisonment power.
And if, if that change was desired, a good way to do that is
by codifying the powers
and then obviously not having some power.
Um, and
as I said in my written submission, this isn't novel.
Um, committees, um, joint committees in,
in the UK Parliament, uh,
have recommended this over maybe 50 years or so.
Um, they have never been adopted, but,
but we could be the first.
Um, and, and yeah, so that's the main thing I have to say.
There are a couple other quick things.
Um, the House has a how to find
and other submitters have suggested, oh, sorry.
How much time do I have left? Let's do that. How much time?
Sorry, do I, um, you've got a couple of minutes. Sure.
I'll just be faster than we have questions.
Um, I know I have said maybe raising the thousand dollars
fine, I'd support that.
Um, and I don't support having in any way kind
of contempt proceedings in court.
Um, I think parliament should, should retain, um, its power,
because otherwise you kind of have this thing
where the government of the day
and the Attorney General have the power to kind
of undermine the house's authority to punish contempt,
um, which isn't desirable.
And, and the courts, obviously the courts apply justice,
but, um, it kind of subordinate the house authority
to the court and the executive government,
which isn't desirable in the context of contempt.
Um, yeah. Okay. That's all I have to say.
I have a question, a question from Ricardo Ez. Mark.
Hey, RA, thank you so much for your submission.
I noted, um, your introductory of remarks around, um,
the leader of the house inviting people to actually mail
or challenging the idea that
maybe we won't get that many submissions.
So thank you for your contribution.
My question was in relationship to, um, the powers
of the house being able to, uh, to be used
to punish contempt, basically, and,
and your request that maybe we, um, specify what kind
of punishments can be applied.
Um, would you see a tension, I guess, with, um, the notion
of how justice supplied actually evolving throughout the
times and that sometimes some more outdated forms
of delivering justice, for example, imprisonment, um,
may not always, I guess, be static?
And if so, how would you see those being resolved?
Um, if those forms of punishment are codified?
So I know other submitters have said
that the power in prison could be removed.
'cause it's kind of in the kind of 21st century, it's kind
of a bit more a liberal and stuff.
Um, I, I don't really have a view on that kind of stuff.
Um, the power exists. It's never really been misused.
We've never, the house has never imprisoned anyone.
Um, yeah, I don't know if there's something
that No, thank you.
Did you have a question
I wanted to ask about the Waka jumping stuff?
Oh, yeah. And the parent conflict.
And I think the, having read that clause,
I think there may well be an apparent conflict.
'cause while it says the house has no power
to make a member seek vacant by expelling the member, um,
uh, I think you're right that, uh, the law does allow
for members seats to be vacant under the statute.
But there is a bit of, I think, crossover
and confusion there, especially clause sub clause two says
that subsection overrides any law to the contrary.
So if the rocket jumping law is seen
to be the house expelling a member, then would that,
would the, would the, would the passing
of the parliament bill giving him that?
It would be later in time, overrule the Yeah.
Or impliedly repealed.
Well, I mean, it probably wouldn't.
I, I mean, I don't think a court would ever find that,
but obviously the purpose of the bill is to make, you know,
the New Zealand constitution be clear.
And that's not very clear, I think.
Um, so that, that's kind of the reasoning there.
Um, yeah, you raise a good point. Yeah. Thank you.
Thank you, RA. Thank
You. Thank you very much.
Uh, we're now hearing from the, um, public Service
Association, Andrew McCall.
Uh, Sorry we've allocated you, uh, 15 minutes. Yeah.
Um, so if you'd like to, um,
I'm sure members have read your submission,
but it'd be great to Yeah.
Um, tell us the highlights of it. Yeah.
Um, thank you to the committee
for giving us this opportunity to speak.
Um, we are speaking on behalf
of the Public Service Association, the union
of over 96,000 public
and community service workers, including over 200
that work here at Parliamentary service
and just about a hundred working for the office, the clerk.
Um, we run up to start off today
by acknowledging today is public service day
and all the wonderful public servants that work here, um,
providing that service of democracy to,
um, I'm Stephanie.
I'm the organizer for the service and the office,
and I engage both with the union members
and the management regularly.
And this is my colleague and Andrew,
who's a policy advisor for the PSA.
And we're both officials speaking on behalf
of our members today.
Um, to create the submission, we engage
with our members across the service in the office
through a series of meetings and a survey and summary.
The main points of our submission fall into four areas,
the funding of the parliamentary agencies,
employment within the parliamentary agencies, powers
for PSOs, and the role of the Parliamentary library.
We also want to include some direct members quotes
because, um, we are speaking here on behalf of them.
So, first of all, funding for parliamentary agencies.
This bill is an improvement, um,
because it's much more appropriate
to have parliamentary oversight than having decisions made
through cabinet in regards to funding.
And our members were clear
that funding is an issue for them.
One member said Underfunding has resulted in understaffing
as people leave the role for better paid work.
And we are not, and we're not
replaced due to budget concerns.
Even our normal staffing levels result in our team being
constantly overworked
and tired, which reduces the quality
of our work significantly.
Something many of us have observed,
the work we do is highly specialized.
So increasing turnover rates means
that even when we do hire new people,
we are still very much understaffed while the new person is
trained and all their work has
to be checked by someone else.
Full training tax around 12 months
to complete another member points out.
High workload in combination with staff leaving
and not being replaced impacts my, on my work frequently.
Instead of the workload reducing remaining staff are often
expected to take on the responsibilities
of the departed staff member.
This causes stress, frustration, and burnout
and staff, especially when staff feel
they're already not fairly paid.
Every year. I notice the annual work plan becoming
increasingly ambitious,
while at the same time staff numbers have been reducing.
We do not think that this will completely address the
funding issues, because it still leaves the decision up
to the discretion of members of Parliament
with an interest in being seen as
to not spend too much money.
And a committee that reflects a proportion of parliament
so will be influenced strongly by the views
of the government of the day.
We think that there should be a greater independence,
either in the form of an independent decision maker,
like the remuneration authority,
or at least an independent source
of advice on appropriate funding levels.
This bill also does not address issues with the funding
of mps administrative support.
Right now, the system forces you mps
to trade off office accommodation with staffing,
which results in people being underpaid
for the tasks they're expected,
or people working in an adequate environments.
These members are also facing issues relating
to underfunding while members says there aren't enough staff
to do the work while you're on leave or catching up on toil,
and there's always a huge pile to come back with.
If we are underpaid, there's no professional development.
The public are becoming more distressed, and we have had,
and we have not had any increases to safety budgets,
let align deescalation training we've been asking for years.
A different member points out the same amount
of money is allocated to us regardless of location.
Our building rent is ridiculously high,
but we don't even have a disabled bathroom
and impacts on the safety of our office
and the facilities we can provide to constituents.
Again, we recommend an independent decision
making or advisory role.
We also suggest some measures
to make funding more equitable.
These include the first is
that the Parliament Social Service should own electorate
offices so
that they can be sure they're up to the appropriate standard.
And mps aren't making decisions about their offices based on
financial in incentives.
The second is that there should be an equitable method
developed for Determinating Travel
and Transport, so it doesn't disadvantage members
and electorates that require, um, which are far bigger.
Um, I'm gonna talk a little bit about the employment
provisions in the bill.
Um, so we support making it easier to transfer workers
between agencies, but only with their agreement.
Um, as it stands, the bill only requires consultation,
and we all know that, um,
consultation doesn't necessarily mean being listened to.
So we would like, um,
so changing a person's employer should require
the agreement of that worker.
And so we'd like that to be explicitly required in the bill.
Um, we don't support the bill's provisions
around political neutrality, um,
and we would like to see that section removed.
Um, the bill would effectively make it permissible
for job applications in the parliamentary agencies
to be asked about their political activity outside of work
and be denied a job based on their response.
And we don't think that's okay.
Um, our members completely understand the important position
of trust that they're in
and the importance of political neutrality.
Um, but people working for the government have a right
to hold political views
and be politically active just like everybody else, as long
as their politics don't affect their work.
Um, the suggestion that political activity outside
of work makes someone inherently unsuitable
for politically neutral work undermines the, uh, the,
the entire concept of political
neutrality in the public service.
It's the ability to have a political life
and keep it separate from your professional obligations
that's central to that neutrality.
Um, and obviously that means people working in parliament
need to be more careful than some other public servants when
it comes to avoiding public political activity.
But it shouldn't mean that past political activities are
relevant to whether they can do their job.
Several of our members spoke about the, um,
comprehensive training that they go through to make sure
that they understand and manage their obligations
around politic the neutral political neutrality,
and that's the right way to go about it.
You make the expectations clear up front
and then you, um, support people to understand how to comply
with those obligations rather than, um,
gate keeping the jobs based on people's trust.
And we don't want to see parliament become a place
where people's participation in democracy, um,
and their interest in it becomes a barrier to employment.
Um, next point is around parliamentary security overall.
We support the proposal
to give parliamentary security officers greater powers
to deal with violent, threatening and dangerous behavior,
but only as long
as parliamentary security officers are supported
to use those powers appropriately
and take appropriate steps to protect the safety of staff
and the people they interact with.
These include, um, PSOs need training
before the powers come into effect.
And we want the parliamentary services assurance
that the training can be delivered in time without
significant need for overtime or understaffing.
And if they can't guarantee
that the power should come enforced later than
what is proposed in the current legislation.
There also needs to be sufficient staffing level
so they can exercise these powers safely,
which means enough people on shift to back them up
and enough gender diversity
to ensure searches can be carried
out by the appropriate people.
We'd like additional office offenses that should be added.
Arson and fighting in public places are not on the
list of offenses at the moment.
And, um, we feel that they might be something
that the committee might consider, um,
reporting requirements, um, on how often the powers are used
and what kind of people are, are they are used on,
should be included into the legislation, as well
as clarifying that the ID required in the bill needs
to be present when exercising the statutory powers,
but not worn on display at all times.
Um, and the last area we wanted
to talk about was the parliamentary library.
Um, so we don't support the provisions in the Bill
Disestablishing, the statutory role
of the parliamentary librarian,
or absorbing the functions of the library
into the normal operation of the parliamentary agencies.
Um, members spoke about what appears to be a gradual
devaluation in the work
that the parliamentary library performs.
And one said, as a newer staff member,
I've heard from others and witnessed to some degree myself,
that the work of the library seems
to have been devalued over time, not by users
of the library, but by rather by library budget staffing
and strategy decisions often made by non librarians.
Maybe the parliamentary library needs
to be an Office of Parliament itself.
Um, members worry that the bill will allow the parliamentary
library's role to be devalued further,
and that research services could be downsized
or become a secondary responsibility
of other roles, um, as a result.
And all of this would mean less expertise
and capacity to carry out its work.
Um, one member, um, said,
parliamentary libraries provides an important role in
providing service to give accurate information
and research to members and their staff on
topics of public interest.
Disestablishing, the statutory role
of the Parliamentary library could have adverse impacts on
the quality of service they can provide.
And risks devaluing an important source of resource
for government opposition.
The role goes way further than just looking up information.
Um, library staff are skilled at taking complicated
information and explaining it in ways that are, um,
use useful and u usable for staff and constituents.
Um, and this is especially important
in holding the government of the day
to account in an important part of our democracy.
So we would like to see the parliamentary librarian keep
their statutory role in the parliamentary library too.
Um, we also see this as an opportunity
to resolve a longstanding lack of clarity about
how the library use its copyright exemption.
Um, because currently our members find it, um, ambiguous
and, um, slightly difficult to navigate
that they are allowed to, um, have an exemption
to the ACT when providing information
to mps in the course of their duties.
But it's not clear whether that also means to staff
of those mps, um, to assist those staff.
And that is an opportunity to clarify in this bill. Um,
Yeah. Um,
and yeah, that's a quick summary.
We'd love to take some questions
if you've got any questions.
Questions Great to forecast.
Yeah. Thank you. Um, touching on the issue around, um,
not supporting, asking job applicants about political
activity and the digital age.
I mean, what risks do you see this placing on people's
political history, particularly when so much
of it now is quite visible, visible.
Um, so people sign petitions,
people make express political views on social media.
Um, do you think this could have a chilling effect on people
feeling they could have a future
and the sector as a result of potential changes?
Uh, definitely. I mean, I, I, I guess for people who see
that as a potential career in the future,
it might have a telling effect on what they decide
to do in their personal lives.
Um, and I guess also people who never think about that
and participate in democracy
because that's a normal part of life
as a person living in New Zealand
and then find that they're effectively discriminated against
when it comes to applying for a parliamentary, um, job. Mm.
Yeah. Thank you. Well, mine, if I may, Mr.
Chair, there's a supplementary on that really.
Um, because obviously in Parliament there's a lot,
there's roles which are, are more and less political Mm-Hmm.
Um, and something in the office of the clerk, for example,
um, has a, is apolitical, um, whereas working
for an mp mm-Hmm.
Although employed by Parliamentary services, uh,
is highly political.
Um, our understanding from reading the current bill is
that it would've only apply
to Pierce corporate staff and office like
Staff. Not,
I guess my, my question is, are you happy with
where those lines are being drawn in terms of, uh,
um, being able to have a political life outside of work?
Well, I guess we don't think
that the requirement should be in there at all
for any of the staff. Yeah. So,
Yeah. So
if I'm recruiting for a person to write questions
for me, then I shouldn't be able to just check
to essentially ask, are you politically aligned to a party
that's inconsistent with the labor pay?
I shouldn't be able to ask that.
Well, you are employing part MP support staff, um,
as an mp and therefore this legislation wouldn't cover.
And that could be one of your questions.
Yeah, I know the list, But, but we, there
Wasn't quite what I asked. Yeah.
But because You, I you seem
to say you should do away with this or,
Or I think the example you should
Be banned altogether I'd give is if someone
as a 16-year-old submitted to a select committee
and then they decided that they loved it and wanted to go
and work for the office of the clerk, um,
and that would be, we would see that as being totally fine,
even if they'd been politically active
and committee submitting to a select committee
or going on a protest on the law.
And like, that's part of being an active member
of society in New Zealand.
And then when they got employed by the office
or the service in a role which would require high
level neutrality Mm.
The service in the office provide training on how and advice
and very clear things in their, um, what do you call them?
Code of conducts around
and the service in the office have quite
different code of conducts.
And you'll notice this
Ones that's, don't think we've taken us anywhere.
You haven't quite answered my question. Okay.
Apologies. Yeah,
Yeah. Look, can I, can
I add to the question if you like,
because it, it, there, it seems to me
that there are a range of different roles.
Yeah. Some of which are genuinely
politically neutral type roles.
Mm-Hmm. But office the clerk is in that, that category.
There are other roles where you are,
you are working alongside mps, you are in, um, you know,
a leader's office, whatever it might be, whereas
intensely political.
And you've gotta be trusted in that role as at least having,
you know, possibly not intended to be neutral.
Um, so there's a range of different roles.
And, and, and also there's different levels
of political, um, behavior.
You know, I mean, attending a
rally, you know, it's kinda like that.
That's, that's kind of very low level,
but if you're an active member of the political party,
which isn't, you know, which is a different party to the one
that you're working for,
that might cause a bit more problem.
Yeah. So I'm asking you, uh, you, you, so you,
you started saying like blanket,
but then not blanket. So really
Bit of a feel for that. So the, the
legislation is written at the moment,
would only give the service in the office the right to ask
around political activity in relation to corporate
and to office staff, not in relation to MP support staff.
And you are happy, you're
Happy. Um, and
I think there's a
MP support staff are the most lovely people,
and I'm sure you've experienced that.
'cause they're the people that do your work.
Um, yes, there is a, there is a, a level
of understanding the political lay of the land
that you would expect, especially for
MP support staff on precinct MP support staff in communities
who, um, you might be able to, they
constituent often staff in particular, I find them
that they don't identify themselves as purely political,
like on precinct staff would, um, who work in MP offices,
they'd be there to serve the public
and, um, they have a certain skill set, which means
that they are constituent providing constituency support.
Um, whereas your communication roles, yes,
you're more likely to need to have to ask that question.
I think what we are trying to get to the point is
that we read this
and the legislation is more of a concern for corporate
and office staff than for NP support.
Okay. So there is distinction. Yeah.
And there is quite a, a big distinction and the terms
and condition of the two groups. Thank
You.
Thank you very much for your, um,
submission. Great. Thank you.
Thanks Kia. We now have Graham,
Angela Graham,
you're not that old by the way.
Thank for having me. Graham, we've got, uh,
You for 20 minutes.
Yes, thank you. Um, I'm happy to take, uh, questions
whenever people come up with them.
I've, you know, I sort of done sort of a wide ranging sort
of read of the bill and sort of a couple of typos here
and sort of thing and, um, you know, some other things
where it's things that aren't in the bill.
So one already mentioned, for example, uh,
earlier about sort of the expansion
of the Official Information Act.
Yeah. I don't think I'll,
I'll let you know when there's five minutes left.
Yes, great. Thank you. Uh,
and I'd say I, I do think that is a good idea,
but you can be, there are ways to be careful so that,
for example, I don't think the official Information Act
should be expanded to cover M mps themselves.
So sort of, you know, spending, you know,
and you know, the types
of information we get about ministers from
ministerial services rather than the types
of information we get about ministers from ministers
offices, you know, so emails
and things like that I think should be absolutely
outside the scope and,
and would be if you were drafting, drafting the sort
of the application of it in the ordinary way.
Um, the other one I think I'll mention briefly at the
beginning, which isn't in the bill,
is the parliamentary budget office,
which I know there's been some scope
or suggestion of in the past.
And this is one possibility of a bill, which, you know,
if it's not, this is the type of bill in which an,
an agency like that might be created.
I, I fought a little bit more since putting in my submission
and I do support the creation of such an office.
Um, but I I,
I think the parliamentary agency model would be the way
to go if you are considering one rather than a, an officer
of Parliament instead of when you're creating the,
the ombudsman, the Ombudsman office has, has a sort
of manner to it, but the, the Ombudsman themselves gives
some of their money to the office and who, who's appointed.
And I think a parliamentary budget office should be speaking
as, as the parliamentary budget office in the way, you know,
I don't know, you know, parliamentary council write
legislation, but it's the parliamentary
council's office who writes it.
And you'll know which member
of staff is giving advice to committee.
But fundamentally, if, if a,
a recommendation is made from the parliamentary council's
office is here's how we would redraft this legislation to,
to take account of a select committee recommendation.
It's the parliamentary council's office, which is giving
that advice and they're, they're the ones who stand
behind it without sort of knowing, oh,
it's someone whom we appointed as,
as the Parliamentary Council
who is sort of standing behind it.
You will have the occasional thing
of the office of the Ombudsman.
The ombudsman will give a, a, a a a, an interview
to morning report or something like that
where they're saying why it was important.
I think for a parliamentary budget office, it should be,
here's what the office says, there's a report
and this is how much they've costed it.
And so something where it is the office
that is speaking rather than an individual, uh, would be,
I think a better way to go.
But, uh, I do think there is some benefit to having
that sort of support given to, uh, select committees
and to parliament generally so
that they can better hold the government to account and,
and provide better scrutiny of,
particularly of financial matters.
Um, happy to take questions on that.
I think perhaps I'll mostly go on the rest of it
for the things that are actually in the bill.
Um, I think the big one I would have, it's something
that I missed when the Parliamentary Privileges
Act was enacted.
I did put a, a written submission on it.
The committee didn't, uh, didn't, uh,
have me along to speak about it.
Um, that the examples I give it at paragraphs sort of 24 on,
on, on, on my written submission, the types of offenses
that should be excluded from the
protection of parliamentary privilege.
Uh, uh, someone giving evidence on oath to a silly committee
or to the house itself has always been able
to be prosecuted for perjury.
They've given evidence on oath,
and the fact that it was in Parliament, uh,
provides no protection to them if they're, if they're found
to have been lying deliberately.
Um, when the Parliamentary Privilege Act was enacted,
two extra offenses, the, the corruption of an MP
and corruption of a minister offenses were added.
Um, but I think we didn't quite realize how perhaps
expansive the expansion of parliamentary privilege was
and the other types of offending
that would not have been protected under the old approach,
but would be protected now.
And so it used to be
that when courts were looking at is this, is this protected
by parliamentary privilege?
There was a, the necessity test that the,
the Supreme Court used in, in the, uh, in the, uh,
the court decision that the parliamentary privilege is act
overturned and is it necessary, is offering protection
to this necessary to protect parliament.
And so offering protection to someone who lies under oath,
not necessary obviously,
but offering protection to several
of the other examples I have, uh, uh, mp, uh,
could be prosecuted for a, um, you know, the,
the UK example is the cash for questions example
or a minister cash for answers
or a cash for a ministerial
statement or something like that.
Um, but if some, if a, if a member of, uh, sorry,
if a member of the public service was involved in perhaps
taking a bribe to, to draft a particular question
or to draft a particular answer, uh,
because that's a different section.
They're not being prosecuted as an mp mp,
they're not being prosecuted, administered.
That would be corruption.
Um, the general corruption offense applicable
to, uh, the public service.
Um, not having that as an exemption as well, given
that someone drafting a draft, doing the first draft of a,
a ministerial response to a question for written answer, um,
is now protected by parliamentary
privilege, historically wasn't.
Um, if that person is some sort of level
of corruption going on there.
That and sort of some of the other offenses, I, I list sort
of half a dozen where I think, oh, um,
hopefully we never see these offenses committed in
New Zealand, but if we do, um, the fact that
preparatory work for parliamentary is now protected
by parliamentary privilege, um, those sorts
of things should have the same exemption that, uh, that,
uh, what's that, uh, sorry, sorry.
Could I get a drink? Sorry. Yeah, go ahead.
No, no, just, um, thank you.
I think there's no salient points
and worth considering around, I guess the
how expensive parliamentary privilege should be.
Um, when you recommend,
and particularly in paragraph 25, around, um,
whether we should consider the list
of offenses going from the protection
of parliamentary privilege be sufficient, um, how would you
suggest we should approach this?
Because I can see other, like, I can see the risk of kind
of hot takes here, um, leading to a messy process.
Do you have any recommendations on, I guess
what could be a good way to approach how we may investigate,
um, the list of things that we choose to exclude?
It's first look at the types of things
that these offenses would involve.
And a lot of these offenses will have things
that relate to government.
Most of the time it would be prosecuted will
have nothing to do with parliament.
Uh, corruption of a minister would generally not be a
parliamentary matter, but sometimes could be,
hopefully we never see it happen.
We have had the prosecution of an MP for correction
as a member of parliament and those sorts of things.
Look at the types of things
where the house might be involved
and think Sh if someone was to do this
in a court proceeding, it could be prosecuted.
You're making up a false document
to use in a select committee to try and to try
and get a, a law change or something like that.
Someone was to do it in a court
case, you could prosecute them.
You should be asking the question of if someone was
to do something like that in relation
to a parliamentary proceeding,
would we want that to be protected?
And so it's look at the types of conduct that would relate
to parliament that could be covered
by some of these offenses.
Um, the obvious one, I think, you know, the corrupt,
the standard corruption offenses, you know,
bribing witnesses, um, bribing witnesses, you know,
we want you to say this, here's this false document.
We want you to use things that if you use it in court,
would absolutely be prosecuted
and would be taken very seriously by courts.
And usually I would think in those sorts of cases,
result in a prison sentence
and ask if that happened at a criminal trial
or a civil trial for that matter.
If that happened in a committee hearing
or someone as part of a petition to try and get a law change
or something like that, would we,
would we have those same concerns?
And so I suspect in ex in a lot of these examples,
you would, and you'd be asking that question of if this was
to happen to us, I think the real question would be,
it would get in the way of the house doing its job,
you know, resolving a, a privileges complaint
or something like that if someone
was to come along and lie to you.
And so that's why, um, the, uh,
there's always been the exception for perjury.
It's just why isn't there now an exception for
creating a false document, which would be the case.
And so it's look at the types
of offenses that would be involved.
And I think the comparison with, if someone was
to do this in relation to a a court case, what would,
how seriously would it be treated?
And then, okay, if someone was to do that in relation
to a parliamentary matter, um,
shouldn't we treat it the same?
And some of these it might be, um, well yeah,
that's not really related to parliament
and most of the types of offending that's going
to go on here is not parliamentary.
But some of them, I think, think if you were looking at a
serious complaint about an MP alleged
to have assaulted someone or something like that,
and the privileges committee were looking at it
and you needed to resolve the factual issues of
what really happened, uh, when a court has that sort
of problem, um, it can deal with it
and parliament should have the same,
essentially the same protections from these sort
of underhand tactics that it currently has, really only
for perjury and not for the other offenses.
Thank you.
It was, that was a think a
big one. I'm going to, uh,
I think perhaps useful for me to go back to the, um,
the parliamentary security.
I think it is reasonable
and appropriate for parliamentary security to be dealt
with in a similar way to court security.
A few years back, the,
the provision was made in the updated provision
around court security officers.
It is appropriate for parliament to do that.
I would echo the concerns, I think that have been mentioned
by some other submitters.
And I've seen the law society submission as well that
the level of training that a police officer has
before they exercise a power of ever get,
ever get the chance to exercise a power of detention
is quite substantial.
Uh, and there are checks in place.
And so I anticipate that at the moment,
parliamentary security officers are
essentially security guards.
And so they would be, you know, required to be, uh,
approved under the security, uh, contractor's legislation
as people who are entitled
and p proper people to be security guards.
Um, there should be more training.
Uh, and so the ex the concerns that the pa the
PSA mentioned earlier about, you know,
is there enough in place to have people
who are properly trained to be able to exercise these,
these powers detention, even if it's for a maximum of three
or four hours or whatever it is in the bill.
Um, that is quite a major, um,
quite a major imposition of state power.
And it might be that, you know,
you can have some people employed
as parliamentary security officers
who do not have that authority.
They, they work in some area, um,
but are not a person who has, I'm the person with a warrant,
you know, who has effectively, I've been given authority
by the, the speaker's office effectively
to exercise these particular powers.
And you, you'll have a large number
of staff here in the parliamentary service who have, uh,
who work here, who will not have these powers.
And so deciding, um, which individuals to entrust
with these powers and what levels of, um, training
and certification will be needed is I think an
important thing to take account of.
And something that effectively happens in the court
security area as well.
It's, it's not just any security officer who, okay,
well you're a, you're a court security officer,
now you've got all these powers.
It's, there are additional steps to go in place
and whom, who exactly gets that power?
Um, and it, what it does not necessarily have
to be everyone who works in that area.
It could be, you know, there's senior, um, you know,
have a great at dealing with sort of corrections officers
and you know, there's the senior corrections officers,
corrections officers, principal corrections officers,
and the levels of powers that each
of them has depends on their level of training and,
and the particular role they fill.
And that could be a way
of mitigating against the possible risks,
which hopefully never arise of giving a power to someone
who has not had a great deal of, of training
and doesn't have the level of training that we would expect,
say a corrections officer or a police officer to have
before exercising these powers.
Well, I know we've got some questions on this.
I'm happy to take questions on any aspect of the bill
or any aspect of my submission.
'cause I know at times I'm gonna be, oh,
I'm talking about something which you could just read.
Um, and so I think you, I'll, I'll be quick.
Um, do you have a view around the, um,
previous submitters comments in relationship
to adding reporting requirements about the
use of the new powers?
I think that is appropriate, yes.
Um, there are reporting, uh, requirements for use
of Force Force, for example, in prisons.
Um, and I, I can't remember if there are in the court stuff,
but, uh, one of the, one of the submissions I read, uh,
pointed to, I think might be the Law Society submissions
coming up after me, uh, gave a specific example of a law
where those sorts of, um, those sorts
of recording requirements are appropriate corrections is the
example I would have the greatest to deal with.
And so if powers are being used, you know, I think yes, uh,
note how often it's being used
and perhaps one of the uses of, uh,
the official Information Act expanding that
I can ask the courts, uh, services
or at least through the Ministry of Justice, how,
how often is this power exercised?
And people will make official information act requests
of police and corrections
of various search powers and things like that.
And they just publish annual reports of this is the number
of types of these sort of searches were used.
And if they don't publish annual reports,
then it's something you can ask for any
of the official information Act and information as to
how these powers are being used, um,
will be useful if they're used.
But it will also be useful if they're not used just so
that people can know, you know, this power exists,
but it is very rare that we have ever done it.
Um, you know, it happened twice
last year or something like that.
Um, every so often the courts will just release information
of how many people tried
to come into a court building when we're found with a,
a knife on them or something like that and got arrested.
Um, and it's just sort of a, a thing that commonly happens
and the public gets to know.
And, um, you live similar things with the, uh, use
of force potentially, I think,
or use of search powers in the aviation
security error and things like that.
These sorts of reporting powers are common and appropriate
and I think could probably be included in the bill with the,
the examples that the law society have
given a, a useful one.
We've got five minutes left,
James, a couple of quick ones.
The recommendation 31 about potentially allowing the courts
to prosecute contempt as a criminal offense.
Does that, does that risk jeopardizing the house's kind
of constitutional right to control
and maintain its own affairs?
I, I don't think it would.
Um, I, I think it's probably, well,
I dunno if it's beyond the scope of this bill.
It's certainly, I i it would be a substantial constitutional
change that I think probably, you know,
I'm not saying do that.
It's just, if you're considering it, here's one possibility.
And other places do, do that and retain that power.
Uh, the US Congress is the obvious example
that we might know from the last few years of, uh, contempt
of Congress being able to be prosecuted in, in courts.
But the Congress does maintain that power
to prosecute it itself, uh, as, as a contempt, um,
the two can exist simultaneously just in the same way
that contempt of court exists, as well
as things like criminal prosecutions, which have
to be pursued by the police.
And so the two can sort of coexist
and I think appropriately do,
Uh, two, two further quickly.
Certainly, um, on the OIA, the focus seems to be on the, um,
the use of, uh, funding yes.
By members would proactive disclosure of spending meet
that requirement without having to, um, change the OAA
and trying to figure out what the line is between, uh,
expenditure and communications
and other information that might be
in the gray area in between.
I, I don't think it would, um,
proactive disclosure is certainly a good thing
for the government, but experience we have had
with proactive disclosure, which isn't a,
at least proactive disclosure,
which isn't a legal requirement, um, has been
that it can be spotty and you just can't be sure.
And so if you get a document that's proactively disclosed
and you, you suddenly have a question
that you want answered, the one
of the strong backups we have in the OAA example is, oh,
they've released something.
I want to check, did it cover this? Did it cover that?
And you can, because you can follow it up
with an official Information Act request.
That's a strong incentive for the proactive disclosure
to be full and proper because
otherwise you can find out it wasn't, if there isn't
that backup, um, you do have, I think that concern
that you reach at the end of, um,
is this really all we've got?
Or if someone looks at something, is there a question,
you know, suddenly you've got a, a $30,000 flight
or something like that and you want some
more information about it.
Um, you should, I think, be able to obtain it in this,
in the way that you can obtain it in respect
to ministers or at the moment.
Um, it's out of scope
that the comment on referendum
citizens initiate a referendum.
This question is probably our scope too,
but, um, going forward, is there scope to reform the,
the referenda referendums legislation generally so
that you're not having to pass new referendum legislation
every time you at the government has a referendum?
Yes. So I think there should be a, a referendum act,
which just applies to all referendums.
And if you just parliament passes a bill,
you had a new one introduced today,
and you just say the electoral commission will conduct a
referendum under parts one, two,
and three of the Referendum Act,
and sometimes, oh, not part four
because you know, this particular referendum isn't
that important and I,
it's something I think the government
could look at and should look at.
I wrote and have received a response from the Minister
of Justice to a suggestion, given that there are a couple
of bills going up, government bills be expected this term
that might deal with referendum,
that put it all in one place
and we don't have to do it over and over again.
Uh, I think that would be a good idea.
And given that, you know, over the last several terms,
you know, there've been sort of one or one
and sometimes two referendum laws, uh, being passed,
you know, quite a few times, uh, uh, you know,
over the last sort of three or four terms,
there have been three or four referendums
and you have to pass a whole new law every time.
Uh, I think that would be a, a very good thing. Sweet.
Thank you. Probably got time for one or two more.
I'll take it. Um, but hey, look, thank you.
Um, just, uh, touching again on a point brought up
by a previous submitter around the, um, being able
to ask job applicants about political activity.
Do you have a view, I guess,
on the potential impacts of that?
Yeah, there is.
I think then the point they were raising the difference
between past political activity
and the political activity that you might be expected
to not engage in while you are employed.
And so having done something in the past is very different
from, okay, now that I have this role, I am not going
to be protesting on the lawn of Parliament, you know,
because I'm working for the office of the clerk or whatever.
And that's a thing that you accept having taken a role
with a, with a strong requirement to not just be
independent, but to be seen as independent
of the political process is I think, very different from,
uh, I have in the past been involved in this organization
or a, a spokesperson for this protest group
or something like that, but I'm not doing it now.
Um, or if, if I'm employed, I know I can't do it
because that's the type of role I've taken on.
And so I think there is a distinction to be drawn and,
but e equally of course, you know,
when you are looking at employing particularly, uh,
political people, the people who write your questions
for you will make official information acts
of the government for you essentially, you know,
the first draft of the work of MB mps, that
that's a different type of enrollment.
And so knowing, you know, there has always been that sort
of exemption for that type of role,
but sort of the general role in particularly, you know,
I want to work at the Office of Clark now, you know,
the fact that, you know, while I was at university
or even perhaps recently,
I was highly involved in some campaign about a particular
issue is not something that should be held against you.
Uh, if, if the viewers, you know, this is the person
who I am now and this is the role I can do and,
and I know my, my obligations are, uh, going forward.
Kta Graham, thank you for having me for your submission.
Uh, we are now going
to hear from the New Zealand Law Society.
I'm Kiara. Um, Kiara, You've got 20 minutes.
Thank you very much. Um,
and thank you very much for hearing our submission.
I'm Deborah Angus, I'm the convener
of the public law committee,
and with me is Te Ho, uh, ov, who's a member
of the public law committee.
The Law Society's, um, submission has been prepared
with input from the criminal, um, law committee,
public law committee, human Rights Committee,
and privacy committees.
So we've, we've covered a wide scope.
Um, first of all, I'd just like to speak, um,
generally about the, the proposal
to consolidate all the law relating
to Parliament into one single statute.
And as a general principle, the law society supports this,
um, with the proposal that this is going
to be an increase in the accessibility of parliamentary law.
If you want to know what the law is on Parliament, then
that helps to promote the rule of law
to look in a Parliament act.
Um, we do recognize that there are some risks
and, um, combining the law about parliamentary
privilege, which is a high constitutional law with matters
of administration and funding of parliament, um,
that there have been, um, court cases,
arguments about whether or not, um, members' expenses,
for example, are protected
by parliamentary privilege in, in the uk.
Um, but we believe that the structure of the bill means
that any possible confusion about the constitutional
responsibilities and the independence of Parliament
and the other side accountability for funding
and administration, we think that that risk was quite low
because of the way that the bill is structured.
Um, there are international precedents either way, um,
but that's possibly because of events.
There've been events, for example, in Australia,
which dealt meant that Australia had parliamentary privilege
legislation passed, um, in the Federal Parliament.
Um, it may not have been by design the, um, Canada
of Parliament Act deals
with all matters parliamentary administration
and parliamentary privilege.
Um, but we recommend that the,
that this is a significant issue
and that the committee should really take a, a, um,
careful look and be satisfied that the balance is right.
Um, and that there, uh, is a very clear distinction
between the parliamentary privilege
and immunity where parliament is going
to be the sole arbiter.
Um, and compare that to the other parts of the bill
that deal with administration
and funding where you've got different
principles and different drivers.
And some of these are around transparency and efficiency
and effectiveness and administrative simplicity,
which are quite distinctive from the constitutional aspects.
Um, thoe is going to just deal with parliamentary privilege.
Thank you. You've, um, surprise go, pardon?
Is was that a surprise to you? No, no, it wasn't.
No, no, it wasn't. But I just don't wanna repeat what, um,
what Deborah's said.
And I think that, that, you've obviously got over written
submission, but I think the, um, really important thing
to draw out is, uh, to address the, yeah,
potential tension I guess between, um, putting in a, uh,
the matter of privilege with the other more administrative
side of things, but as our submission trying to draw out,
um, sometimes there might not actually be a clean
distinction between those things anyway.
And we've found some, maybe 'cause we're barristers,
but we've found some case law we courts of
g give good examples of, um, those two things coming
into one matter.
And I guess your uk um, case you mentioned is a good one
where, um, it was a, it was about expenses,
which is on the more administrative side,
but it was MPS who'd, um, potentially
unlawfully claimed them
and so wanted the protection of privilege.
Um, and so you can see the two
actually do belong in the same discussion.
And so as you say, overall, we, we considered
that the way it's been drafted, um, makes it fair enough
so that the, um, the potential risk of
confusion or, or,
or somehow diminishing the constitutional importance
of privilege, um, is, is, is, is not a,
a major risk in, in our view.
Um, and the only other thing I was going
to say about privilege was that, um, we
for, well, for my sins, I,
I read all the background material
and it seemed pretty clear that, um,
there wasn't an intention to change the, the content
or substance of parliamentary privilege law.
Um, and that that's kind of dotted throughout some
of the documents, um, including some of the, the footnotes
or tucked away here and there.
And the only suggestion we'd make is that it
might be worth the committee considering, um, making
that clear in, in the report that, um, it is
a consolidation goal rather than a, um, an attempt
to change the substance of parliamentary privilege.
Um, and, and that was about all I
wanted to say, I think on privilege.
Okay. Thank you.
Um, if I can just deal with the issue
around members' expenses.
Um, the law society supports the changes, um,
that are in the bill for the system of, um, funding
for members work related expenses,
including the more family friendly options, um,
and the greater transparency
and clarity about the rules at the moment.
These are, um, a bit of a, um, uh,
they're difficult to find.
They're not that clear. They're not
necessarily that cohesive.
And, um, we think there's a, a wider, um,
democratic benefit in supporting members who've got family
care responsibilities.
And overall, this means that you get a, um, more diverse
and more inclusive representation.
Um, the bill's got very clear principles about
openness and transparency.
Um, currently these are in determinations
and in the lower level instruments.
And, um, we believe that this is appropriate
to move these principles into the primary legislation.
However, our concern is that the access
to information about funding
and accountability is inconsistent
and it's still very limited.
And the law society recommends strengthening the
requirements about both disclosure
and to provide greater access
to information about decision making
and determining expenses.
Um, we're very aware of the Law Commission's report, um,
previously about having wider, wider reforms in the O
and applying the OIA.
Um, but what we are suggesting is in the absence of dealing
with everything under the OIA, that this is the opportunity
for Parliament itself to develop its own bespoke regime, um,
to provide for greater transparency
and openness about parliamentary administration matters.
So instead of saying we, we'll deal with a whole lot
of things that, um, might be parliamentary related,
but exclude, um, matters such as, um, members
of Parliament, um, uh, political matters
focus simply on, in this bill
around the parliamentary administration and the expenses,
and deal with these matters
and look at it from two, um, principles.
Firstly, dealing with the reporting of aid by agencies.
So currently, um, the, the, um, clerk
and the chief executive of the parliamentary service report
on thing on travel and accommodation expenses per member
and, and a overall amount.
This is a, was previously a voluntary regime.
It was criticized by the Law Commission
as lacking in transparency,
and it hasn't been updated since, really since 2009.
And our suggestion is
that the legislation should provide more categories
of disclosure and allow the ab ability
for this to be updated.
Also require the agency heads once a parliamentary term
to consult with the public about, well, what isn't,
what information does the public want to know about
what information, um, would be helpful in terms of,
um, having greater transparency about
parliamentary spending.
And that would align with the other, with the determinations
that are going to be made once a parliamentary term.
The third, um, proposal is to provide for an access
and information determination to be made by the speaker.
So this would be secondary legislation,
and it would sit alongside the new determination
that the speaker's going to make around, um,
members' expenses.
But this is to apply as to how parliamentary agencies are
to deal with requests
for information about parliamentary administration
and should apply the principles of openness
and transparency referred to in the bill.
And our suggestion is that, um, the requirement should be,
um, a public consultation process prior to making the access
and information determination
and public notification,
which would happen if it was secondary legislation.
Now, there is some reference in the documents
that support the, the bill.
There's reference to, um, a current information protocol,
um, and guidance to be made by the, um,
parliamentary agencies about parliament access, how,
how to access parliamentary
and, um, administration information.
But neither of those documents are recognized in the bill.
So there is, um, reference
to the, uh, to ways that you can get information,
but these are not recognized currently in the bill.
And so our proposal is to provide for a process
that happens, um,
but do it as a piece of secondary legislation
that sits alongside the speaker's determination.
Um, parliamentary secure, perhaps we'll move
to parliamentary security
Yeah. On
that. Um, we,
and generally support the I idea of modeling
it on court security.
Um, we think that there's en enough similarity to make
that sensible,
and we've simply suggested for the, um,
committee's consideration that you give thought to, um,
the differences in, in the premises of courts in the,
in the precinct to parliament
and, um, ensure that there are, you know, you, you, um,
accommodate those differences.
Um, and then the rest of our submission,
which is in section five of our written submission is, um,
probably fairly characterized as, as a series of, um,
suggestions to make technical improvements in, in our view,
rather than anything more, um, significant than that.
And, and they're all designed, we, we think, to, um, assist,
um, them operating in a way that
suits parliament, um, better.
And I suppose one example is the, um,
change we've suggested it, um,
a a a about whether the, if someone is, um, found to have
something that they shouldn't have on them, whether you may
or must report it, um, to,
to the police if you're the officer.
And at the moment it's mandatory and, and you must,
and our suggestion as well, it might be more appropriate for
that to be, um, discretionary
because the item might be, um, something that's lawful
to have in your possession, like a protest banner
or something, but which nevertheless shouldn't be taken in.
But it doesn't necessarily mean it has to be elevated to a,
um, to a police matter
or, um, another example we've given is just
that thought perhaps should be given to, um,
at five point 11.
Um, we, we've given the example of, um, scanning
and, and the, the bill speaks in terms of you're allowed
to scan, uh, things but without touching them.
And we've said, well, that, that, that makes sense
of course, but when you might have more vehicular traffic in
parliamentary precincts, how does that,
um, work or not work?
And does it just need to be tweaked?
So that's, um, more on the nature of, of
what our submissions on, on security matters are.
And the only other thing I was going to mention was, um,
given that somebody asked a question about it
to an earlier submitter about, um, reporting obligations,
and it, it was us little society who, um, support the idea
of of there being, um, a,
a reporting obligation.
And we've put suggestions in
there about how that might work.
And, and we've suggested not all of the detail has to be,
um, in the bill itself,
but it would be sensible to have at least a framework for,
um, yes, there is a obligation
and the rest can be, um, worked out, uh,
not necessarily in the act itself.
So, um, that was all I was gonna say about, um,
parliamentary security, unless you had any, um, question.
Could have about five minutes left if you Mm-Hmm.
Uh, wouldn't mind taking some questions now?
Sure. Mm. Go ahead,
Andy. I'm just waiting
just on the
parliamentary expenses side of things.
My, my, I, look, I might be wrong on this,
but certainly the last time, which is very,
very recently that I saw a Yeah.
Expense columns that did it.
You, you've asked international separate and, and,
and member spouses family track the two bits you've
identified as being, oh, maybe you should have those,
but I thought the international one was set
but already separated out already.
I can tell you. Well,
and certainly the last one that I saw, we two
or three days ago had international separated.
Right. So I suspect were probably already doing that.
Uh, no, it doesn't, no, it wasn't like
I might be separated into the, um, office, the office
of the Clark, the inter parliamentary, um, relations spend.
And so it's, it, it, it its a composite member that be. Yes.
Um, and so that's one of the issues, whereas with, if
for example, with minister, with minister spending, um,
you'd be able to do it basically on Yeah.
On as per the spend. Yeah.
I think that's what it is. My understanding is we can't
use, we can't have international spending without the
speaker's authority or the witness authority.
The witness in the room might be able to verify.
Yes. Yeah. Um,
There's a, there's a, there's a, there's a form
that gets filled out that does get signed off
and ultimately by the speaker.
I had a follow up on that one as well.
It's, it's a, if I can, it's just on the, you make a point
of 4.5 about how, um, details about spouse
and family travel isn't broken down.
And I wonder whether or not the,
the balance is still okay on that aspect
because, um, while there is a lot of public interest in how,
um, MPS members spend their, um, budgets,
their fixed budgets, and also the travel budgets
so they can do their work, there was also a, um, good reason
to provide some funding for, um, family members
to travel from home base to parliament in order
to maintain that family connection.
And there may well be a risk that if that is all broken down
and released publicly.
Mm-Hmm. A it might identify, you know, uh, how many
children a member might have,
and there might be some personal security risks there,
but also it might put pressure on those members not to use
that funding if political pressure comes on,
which then might go counter
to why it's there in the first place, which is to try
and, um, maintain some sort of reasonable life balance.
Now, I don't have children,
but members in the room will have children
and there is a lot of pressure on those members,
um, and time away from home.
So I wonder if you had any comment on at
what point would the, the limit be reached on openness
and transparency versus the wellbeing
of members and their families?
Um, well, I mean, that, that is a very good point.
The, the real issue, um, when it comes down
to it is the oversight of, um, of the spending.
And is there any difference then between what ministers do
and what members of Parliament do?
Um, because there is some spousal travel for ministers, um,
and I think that the, the,
the balance has to be got, right,
but is it, how helpful is it
by having one composite amount?
Um, certainly you wouldn't want to identify individuals, um,
but it may be possible to have some way of identifying it
as that its expenses related
to a member without actually relating, you know,
identifying any particular individual.
Mm-Hmm. I had a question just in relationship to point,
um, on the search power stuff.
Uh, and particularly in, you already talked a bit about the,
how you would prefer use of discretion,
change the master may.
Um, and I guess, how do you see that,
I guess tying into some of the other concerns
that have been raised around adequate training
and, um, uh, competency
and for example, um, gender equity,
um, and reporting guidelines.
So if, if we move to a discretionary use of powers,
what do you think would need to be in place to make sure
that that discretion is applied, um,
in a way that it is fair?
Yeah. Yeah. I,
I suppose the first thing I'd say it's important to, um,
be really clear about what we're proposing should be changed
from a must to a may.
And it's actually probably more, um, rights consistent
or rights friendly than, than having it as a must.
'cause at the moment it's, yeah,
that the officer must attain the person, um, and,
and they must contact the police
to arrange an attendance of a police officer.
And so, um, that, that, that,
that's all we're saying should be more discretionary.
But as, as, as for your question about should you know of,
of course there should be able, um, training
and of course there should be appropriate training
for all kinds of, um,
the common interactions you're gonna have with all kinds
of people who are coming into Parliament.
That, that's entirely appropriate, I would've thought. Yeah.
Any other questions? No, very useful for that.
Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you. Cheers.
Target re the,
and now we have the right honorable Sue Jeffrey Palmer.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The, um, so Keith can't come today.
It's not where he will just mine, I think. Now.
Um, I
want to begin by just saying that
I want to talk about the policy here, not about the drafted,
because as Christopher Bishop said, when he
introduced this legislation that is
of constitutional significance,
and I totally agree with that,
and I think it's quite important to get it right
because of that.
And there's a lot of work being done on this bill.
It's, uh, being gone back to, I think Mr.
Pel coming in, isn't he?
Uh, he, he was involved in it, uh,
and he was centrally involved
as well in the parliamentary privilege of Act
of 2014, about, which, I'll say something shortly,
but one of the features of this work is that
a lot of it seems to have taken place
before The occupation of Parliament
and the occupation of Parliament,
which I witnessed from my office over in the law school,
was a formidable thing that went on for about three weeks
and was extremely disorderly.
And in fact, the whole university law school wasn't,
couldn't be used for a couple of weeks at that time.
And in my little office where I look out,
there was this tent
where people were keeping their children,
they'd go off every day to the demonstration come back.
This is not something that in my view can be tolerated.
And I'm surprised to see that there hasn't seemed
to be much discussion of any of that in the
papers that I have read.
Uh, and I notice that the regulatory impact statement
for the operation of the parliamentary precinct was dated
September, 2021.
And the, uh, regulatory impact statement three,
parliament bill operation
of parliamentary precinct was 6th of September, 2021,
although the supplementary analysis, uh, was on
the 27th of September.
So what I really want to invite the committee to do is
to think fairly carefully about whether the policy settings
are right in respect of
how the Parliament should be dealt with.
I do not think the Parliament is in the
same position as the courts.
I do not, not think the courts are subject
to demonstrations very frequently
and certainly not of the character
that was here in February, uh, in January
and February of 2022.
Uh, and if you look at the record of that,
that was a disgraceful thing
that the Parliament should not have tolerated.
And it was very difficult to do anything about it.
And, and I just think that you've got
to look at the policy in this bill as to whether
or not that problem.
If it recurred
and we live in uncertain times, then it,
then you really have to have nailed it.
And I don't think this bill does that.
I really do not think it is appropriate to have
large number of untrained people who are have,
who have very wide coercive powers of search
and seizure and detention within these premises.
Now, I would much prefer the police.
I know that that's not possible
because of the, the numbers of police,
but I do think it would be appropriate to
put two policemen in these premises
whenever Parliament is sitting.
'cause that's when the prospect
of disorder is at the greatest.
And I just think those provisions need to be reconsidered.
Now, um, the,
I do welcome this policy
because when I came to this parliament
and became the deputy leader of the opposition,
there was a minister in charge
of the legislative department.
And that minister decreed that he,
I should not be having any furniture in my office
that the clerk of the house had recommended,
and he wouldn't approve it.
Uh, there is no minister of the legislative department now,
and that is why it's not quite inappropriate
for, for the executive branch of government to exert
control over the legislative branch of government.
It is wrong, and it's been a very long,
when also when I first came to this parliament,
ministers used to sit on subject matter select committees,
what a conflict of interest that was.
And I see that under secretaries who are neither
constitutional fish nor foul, uh, are in fact, uh,
still able to do that.
Now, I don't approve of that either.
I think you've gotta have a rigorous division between them.
Now we've had the abolition of the legislative department,
we've had the, um, uh, clerk of the House
of Representatives Act,
and we've had the passage of the Parliament Service Act
and the members of Parliament Renew.
That's good. But the approach here is even better.
And I do want to commend the Parliament on arriving.
This is the first time, I think,
since the 1852 New Zealand Constitution Act was passed,
where you could possibly say there was a reasonable ability
to keep the executive out of the legislature.
People often think,
I don't think the public knows there's a difference
between the executive and the legislature.
Some mps are members of the executive, but most are not.
And one of the things that worries me is that a lot of
mps wanna be ministers.
If you were a member of the House of Commons
with 650 members, you might think that was pretty remote.
And many back benches in the United Kingdom have careers
of backs, benches, and respectable careers.
They get knighted and stuff like that.
Now, I think that we've got
to start thinking differently about the parliament here, uh,
because mps are drastically overworked.
They do not have time
to carry out all the manifold duties they have.
We've already had discussion here today about the pressures
on them, especially with young families.
It is acute, and you do need more support.
And the way to fix it is to have a hundred
and, uh, a hundred
and, uh, lot more mps than we've got.
I've written a law review article about this, which has just
gone to the Law Review,
and I can provide you with a copy of it
because the New Zealand Parliament does not sit enough
to do all the work it does.
And you will remember that the, that the
Auditor General said as recently as June of this year,
that the executive is loading far too much legislation up
into the Parliament and it cannot cope with it.
Now, you may find this contrary to the range of what the
bill is about, but I'm saying to you,
if you want a permanent ability
to have good legislation, think it through
and get the Parliament to work as well as it can.
And it's got quite a way to go in
that respect, in my opinion.
So the coercive powers of the state worry me,
and I think you've gotta rethink that.
But, um, the parliamentary
privilege is worries me a lot.
And so, Kenneth, Keith and I share this view
that it is wrong as a matter of principle, to have
a political vote, a wit vote in the Parliament
that allows someone to be imprisoned, uh, just
because the Parliament says so.
And indeed, I've written a book about this
and it's, uh, I can provide you with a,
with a manuscript copy of it.
'cause the pub, I told the publisher I would do this,
and he didn't object.
Um, now the,
we've had a codified criminal law
in this country since 1893.
And that codified criminal law says
that parliament in legislation must state the
ingredients of an offense.
And parliamentary privilege is as vague as all get out.
There is no clear definition of it.
And indeed, there's been a lot of discussion.
I have looked at the law in Denmark,
'cause Denmark is the best government country in the world,
and we all want to get to Denmark.
I've looked at it in the United Kingdom,
I've looked at it in Australia, I've looked at it in Canada
and Queensland.
Now Queensland has a codified criminal law
that Samuel Griffith, uh, produced.
And it provides a lot of offenses about parliament.
You can't take a gun in there, for example.
It says, so, uh, I, I won't go into the detail of this,
but what I'm saying is there are a lot of wider issues here.
And you think about parliamentary coverage, what a useless
thing that would be to deal with the sort of problem we had
with the occupation of the Parliament grounds.
It just isn't feasible.
So I think you've gotta think differently about this
than we traditionally have.
When I looked at the debates of the 2014 Parliamentary
Act, the Parliamentary Act, what did,
there was no discussion about imprison, none at all.
And of course, it was the two attorneys
who were involved in this were, were Mr.
Finon and Mr. Parker. And they were both very able people,
but they thought it was a hallmark
of the Westminster system.
But they haven't imprisoned anyone in Britain since 1880.
You do not want to have power on prison
that you are not going to exercise.
It's futile and silly.
And, and as for asking the district court
to enforce your fines, well, let me just say this about,
there was a famous attorney general here, um, who, who,
who said that we ought not
to have, so Francis Bill
had said he was highly doubtful
that the House had power to impose a fine.
Well, now the House has given itself power
to impose the fine.
And I don't think you achieve anything by doing that.
You can simply make a criminal offense under the Crimes Act
about the conduct you want to reach and reach it.
And I just think it's, it's,
I don't think anyone on Lampton Key would think
that a parliamentary trial for imprisonment
or a fine was a fair thing on strangers.
Strangers to the house. I think parliamentary privilege
works quite well for, for people
who are in the Parliament.
But I chaired the privileges committee when I was the
Attorney General, and I formed a very low
opinion of its fairness.
It's changed. Well, uh, I sat first here, went
to Robert Maldoon, was cross-examining a journalist,
a species of person he did not like.
And, and the guy was just about shivering.
I mean, and he said, I remember this.
So Robert said, if you don't behave, will change
of the walls and the Bellamy basement
and feed you on bellamy pies.
Now, that's all might be very funny,
but it's not very nice if you're the subject of it.
And so I I I just think
I'll hand this manuscript over to you.
You can do, do it what you like. You,
You, if I can, Mr.
Chair, you may, may wanna double check with your publisher
before you do that, because otherwise
we're all getting a free copy of your
Book. I don't mind, David,
I mean, I wrote it
because I was deeply concerned about this.
I drafted a member's bill
for David C. David Cagle introduced that bill.
He writes the fore to this book.
Uh, and, and in fact, the, uh, the
way in which the reform was done in the end,
the Parliament spent years doing nothing on
this and getting it wrong.
And when they finally did it, they didn't get it right.
And my opinion, and that's why I've engaged myself
with some considerable effort to try
and fix what I think is a bad anomaly.
I don't think anyone on Lampton Key would think that
that Parliament was able to imprison them.
I don't think they know that.
And if they did know it, I don't think they'd like it.
Now, the the other, uh, thing
that I think is quite important is that the,
the Parliament, we've got problems with democracies all
around the world, and I've got 12 propositions that
are probably not all of 'em are relevant,
although the Official Information Act is one of the things
that I deal with in these 12 propositions,
which the Law Review article is about.
And I can give you a summary of them
if you want them right now, just so
that you are thinking more widely than I think you are
thinking at the moment.
And the, the protecting of democracy
by reforming parliament is in fact a very important thing.
Parliament has to exist with the
institutional confidence of the people.
And that confidence has been reduced just in the last, uh,
it was, it's fallen in 2023
to 4.3 out of 10.
Uh, and, uh,
that is down from 4.7 in
2021.
So I think the Parliament has to think about
how its behavior and how its actions.
There's been a lot of urgency taken here in recent times.
Unreasonable amounts of urgency
that stops the proper treatment of legislation.
It stops the, the, um, the
ordinary legislative process of working stuff
through just the select committee.
I was so interested to observe it.
I remember when the national development bill was in part
of a select committee, I cross examined one
witness for an hour and a half.
You couldn't do that these days.
There's too much legislation.
This, the Parliament has changed.
There are not enough mps to do the work.
They suffer enormously
because they have to be in their electors
and they have to be here, and they have to be everywhere.
They've gotta read a lot of stuff.
They've gotta be, they've gotta understand
enormous amounts about public expenditure.
They can't keep up with it.
They might be on two or three select committees.
And we do not sit nearly as much
as the House of Commons does.
The number of hours we sit is very low.
And I've got that in this article.
And, and so I'm, I'm, I'm really wanting to plea with you
that you need a wider lens about
how the parliament's gonna work in this community.
And why? Because you can't just,
it was, uh, the German chancellor who once said
that you don't want to see how legislation is made any room.
You wanna know how sausage is made.
Uh, because if you knew what it was, you wouldn't eat it.
Uh, and I think there's been a slackness about legislation.
And I think in a small parliament like this, you cannot
go on working your MPS to dearth
without giving some thought.
We had, we haven't increased the number of mps here since,
um, 98, I think it was.
Um, um, no, I, I just,
uh, and, and we look, the last time we increased the number
of mps was two years
after the referendum on MP.
Um, and the result is that we had
3 million something people then,
and we've got 5.2 million now.
So how does that work?
That is, that does not produce a parliament
that is effective.
And it does, and it means that corners are cut.
And I feel worried about that. It's not your fault.
You, you have to treat the parliament as it is,
but the parliament is very, very slow to change.
And it needs to change
because we need to have a robust democracy here,
and we've got that, but we'll lose it if we're not careful.
So that's really essentially my lesson.
Uh, but I happy
any, I'm sure members have got
Questions start, we start with.
Andy, do You wanna Thank you, Jeffrey, the really, um,
interesting questions you've raised,
which I think are probably quite a few of them are well
outside the, the relatively narrow scope in some ways
of the bill, but just, well, I'm not sure about
that. So, well, you well,
That means a lot of discussion
about the official information.
Actually, I'm thinking about the
constitutional, um, issues there. So
Well official information
after constitutional legislation. Yes.
Well, the two things I was gonna ask you about,
and one is, I mean, you've, you've reflected on the,
you know, parliament being too busy Mm-Hmm.
Do you have any reflections, uh, perhaps as advice, uh, on,
in fact the efficiency of the way in which we, uh,
undertake the business of Parliament
and whether in fact that might be part of the,
um, part of the solution?
Well, I think, sorry, can I just finish that? Yeah.
And the other one is just the relationship between
the executive and the parliament in terms of, uh,
of the influence of the,
of the executive on, on the Parliament itself.
Well, you, you would reflect in your own experience
Too. There's, there's
far too much influence
of the executive on the New Zealand parliament
because the parliament is so small.
And if you take out the government, you take out a cabinet
of 20, uh, with the hanger hangers on, uh, you,
you find that, you find that the number
of people you've got, you can put on select committees.
Select committees. There are quite a few members on two
of them, and there are some on three of them.
Now, how do they get around and do all that work?
We always know that select committees,
often people don't turn up.
They can't, they're too busy.
I I mean, there is, there is a whole heap of things
that require attention,
and that's what the 41 page paper is about.
And I'm happy for you to circulate that.
And I mean, it'll, Mr. Bishop was kind enough to say
that I should come and tell this committee's what I thought.
So I've done it. Um, Jane,
Thank you, sir. Um,
thank you, sre.
I'm concerned you're so desperate to table the manuscript
that might have a written constitution
Attached to it. No. So
You're trying to say something, I'm
just talking about reforming parliament.
No, I had a question about, um, the,
your point about the parliamentary protest
and the powers that Parliament has in your view are,
it could be the case that, um, the powers are available,
but there are questions about whether
or not they were used appropriately,
or do you think that the powers deal with
that situation just aren't available
and there should be something put in the
Bill? Um,
I don't think the powers are available
to untrained people.
The power, the coercive powers of the state,
the prime people in New Zealand who, who
exert those are the New Zealand police.
They're trained in it, they're good at it,
they're accountable.
I've often wondered that we have a national police force in
many countries that would not be tolerated
as a concentration of power.
That works very well here
because the police are very, very carefully,
um, trained and watched.
We've got a very good police force.
But when you start giving powers of search seizure
and detention to guards who may not have much education,
which haven't been to the police college
and which are not trained
and don't have a lot of experience,
you can get into trouble very quickly.
And I think the coercive powers of the state have
to be exercised with great caution,
and you don't want to entrust large numbers
of people to deal with them.
And I don't accept the analogy of courts
that the parliament is not,
is the central democratic country, uh,
central democratic institution of the country.
It's not, it's not a call.
The New Zealand Parliament is not a call on that line.
But I, I worry very much about that
because I, as far as I could see,
the legislation had not been informed
by what happened during
that parliamentary occupation.
Now it, it, perhaps it was,
but there's no indication of it in the documents
that I was given access to.
Okay. Very quickly, the ability for police
to operate within parliamentary precinct is limited
for, I think good, yeah.
Constitutional reasons 'cause of these privileges. It would.
And, and we are seeing some increased presence
of police in particular in the gallery and publications.
Yes. Is there a, a risk that, um, formalizing or, or,
or maintaining a constant police presence in the parliament
could undermine that separation between the, the powers of,
or the rights of mps as members of the legislature
and police as essentially an arm of the executive?
No, I don't think so.
Um, because police are not subject to power to orders
by ministers, uh, they, they, they are separate.
And if you look at the policing act,
what I was involved in when I was at the law commission,
you'll find that distinction quite well made.
All I'm saying is there should be two
police on the premises.
They could be different ones each time,
but a policeman has a different status than a guard.
Thank you.
Yeah. Thank you very much. And hey, look,
I know your comments around, um,
how Parliament is under resources.
We don't have enough in peace, and MPS themselves
don't have enough resources.
One of those resources
that exist is the parliamentary library
and other submitters have talked about.
It's its role. I wanted to know if you had any reflections
around, um, whether you think that, um, the,
uh, move to, uh, removing the parliamentary librarian,
the parliamentary library from legislation incorporating
these roles into the parliamentary agencies agency, sorry,
could diminish the independence
and resourcing of those functions?
Well, I, I have gotta worry about that.
The Canadian, uh, parliamentary library is used a lot
by mps, uh, as, as a means of getting expert advice,
uh, for, for back benches against the executive.
And, and that could be a big use of it here.
Uh, and I think that would be a good use of it.
And I used to make a lot of use of it,
although the librarians used to tell me
that their main thing was writing speeches
for bowling day openings.
Um, so they, the thing is that
every resource, the executive has all the resources,
and the parliament has very, very few.
And the back benches have very few.
You have research units and things like that.
But if you want expert advice at a select committee, uh,
you've, you've got the clerks from the, from the, uh,
clerk's office and, and that's good.
But you need, sometimes there are experts that you want
to bring and there are some limited case, uh,
when you can do that, but it's not very extensive.
But if you wanna have a proper scrutiny of the executive,
you've gotta bring firepower bear.
And that's what it's very difficult to do.
Thank you. Thank you. We've Got a question from Maria.
Uh, Uh, sir Jeffrey, um, I,
I'm, I'm, first of all,
I I would very much appreciate a copy of your manuscript.
Thank you very much. And, uh, I hope to get that,
um, um, shortly.
But look, I just, uh, what I've heard
and enjoyed listening to by the way, is the, like you,
you've come into some of the detail,
but you are more, it seems to me you are at the, the, the,
what you need us to appreciate is the committee is the
higher level thinking, it seems to me.
And you used the phrase wider lens.
You talked about as you opened the policy, this is,
and it seems to me you are impressing
this is a significant moment in time
constitutionally to get it right.
And you talked about the wider lens.
Can you help me understand what then?
Because if you understand it,
surely there's a few other smart people
that should understand that.
Why isn't that so what, what, what,
what restricts the wider lens, would you say?
Busyness, Ah,
Getting the work done.
Mm-Hmm. So much work. You have to read the bills.
You have to figure out what you're gonna say.
You have to make a speech about it.
You have to go to a select committee.
You have to listen to submissions.
Uh, you have to read those, you have to think about it.
And people have so little time that they're,
they've just gotta keep their head of,
I found it extremely demanding being an mp.
It's worse being a minister,
but you have much more help if you're a minister.
Uh, and, and, um, you can do much more because of that.
And I think that there's a, there's a gap
between the back bencher
and the ministers, which is unhealthy and undesirable.
Thank you. Thank you, sir. Jeffrey,
Thank you very much for your time, sir Jeffrey, as always,
very, very great submission.
Thank you. Well, I hope I didn't sort of
put you off too much,
but I thought we've all got a manuscript read.
That's a different book when you've got,
you haven't got the summary sheet though.
And, and, uh, now the popular part of the, um,
our meeting is concluded.